# DepthSizer: Read-depth based genome size prediction

```
DepthSizer v1.0.0
```

For a better rendering and navigation of this document, please download and open [`./docs/depthsizer.docs.html`](./docs/depthsizer.docs.html), or visit <https://slimsuite.github.io/depthsizer/>.
Documentation can also be generated by running DepthSizer with the `dochtml=T` option. (R and pandoc must be installed - see below.)

## Introduction

DepthSizer is a wrapper for the genome size estimate methods of Diploidocus. DepthSizer needs a genome assembly
(fasta format, `seqin=FILE`), a set of long read (ONT, PacBio or HiFi) data for the assembly (`reads=FILELIST` and
`readtype=LIST`) (or `readbp=INT`), and a BUSCO full table of results (`busco=TSVFILE`).

DepthSizer works on the principle that `Complete` BUSCO genes should represent predominantly single copy (diploid
read depth) regions along with some ooor quality and/or repeat regions. Assembly artefacts and collapsed repeats etc.
are predicted to deviate from diploid read depth in an inconsistent manner. Therefore, even if less than half the
region is actually diploid coverage, the **modal** read depth is expected to represent the actual single copy
read depth.

DepthSizer uses `samtools mpileup` (or `samtools depth` if `quickdepth=T`) to calculate the per-base read depth
and extracts the modal read depth for each BUSCO gene along with the overall modal read depth for all gene
regions. Genome size is then estimated based on a crude calculation using the total combined sequencing length.
This will be caculated from `reads=FILELIST` unless provided with `readbp=INT`.

BUSCO single-copy genes are parsed from a BUSCO full results table, given by `busco=TSVFILE` (default
`full_table_$BASEFILE.busco.tsv`). This can be replaced with any table with the fields:
['BuscoID','Status','Contig','Start','End','Score','Length']. Entries are reduced to those with `Status` = `Complete`
and the `Contig`, `Start` and `End` fields are used to define the regions that should be predominantly single copy.
Output from BUSCOMP is also compatible with DepthSizer.

**NOTE:** The current genome size prediction appears to be an over-estimate. There is currently no adjustment for
contamination. The `mapadjust` option attemtps to correct for read mapping and imbalanced insertion:deletion ratios
etc. but has not been extensively tested.

---

# Running DepthSizer

DepthSizer is written in Python 2.x and can be run directly from the commandline:

    python $CODEPATH/depthsizer.py [OPTIONS]

If running as part of [SLiMSuite](http://slimsuite.blogspot.com/), `$CODEPATH` will be the SLiMSuite `tools/`
directory. If running from the standalone [DepthSizer git repo](https://github.com/slimsuite/depthsizer), `$CODEPATH`
will be the path the to `code/` directory. Please see details in the [DepthSizer git repo](https://github.com/slimsuite/depthsizer)
for running on example data.

## Dependencies

Unless `bam=FILE` is given, [minimap2](https://github.com/lh3/minimap2) must be installed and either added to the
environment `$PATH` or given to DepthSizer with the `minimap2=PROG` setting, and [samtools](http://www.htslib.org/)
needs to be installed. Unless `depdensity=F`, R will also need be installed.

To generate documentation with `dochtml`, R will need to be installed and a pandoc environment variable must be set, e.g.

    export RSTUDIO_PANDOC=/Applications/RStudio.app/Contents/MacOS/pandoc

For DepthSizer documentation, run with `dochtml=T` and read the `*.docs.html` file generated.

## Commandline options

A list of commandline options can be generated at run-time using the `-h` or `help` flags. Please see the general
[SLiMSuite documentation](http://slimsuite.blogspot.com/2013/08/command-line-options.html) for details of how to
use commandline options, including setting default values with **INI files**.

```
### ~ Main DepthSizer run options ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ###
seqin=FILE      : Input sequence assembly [None]
basefile=FILE   : Root of output file names [depthsizer or $SEQIN basefile]
summarise=T/F   : Whether to generate and output summary statistics sequence data before and after processing [True]
genomesize=INT  : Haploid genome size (bp) [0]
bam=FILE        : BAM file of long reads mapped onto assembly [$BASEFILE.bam]
reads=FILELIST  : List of fasta/fastq files containing reads. Wildcard allowed. Can be gzipped. []
readtype=LIST   : List of ont/pb/hifi file types matching reads for minimap2 mapping [ont]
dochtml=T/F     : Generate HTML DepthSizer documentation (*.docs.html) instead of main run [False]
tmpdir=PATH     : Path for temporary output files during forking (not all modes) [./tmpdir/]
### ~ Genome size prediction options ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ###
busco=TSVFILE   : BUSCO full table [full_table_$BASEFILE.busco.tsv]
readbp=INT      : Total combined read length for depth calculations (over-rides reads=FILELIST) []
quickdepth=T/F  : Whether to use samtools depth in place of mpileup (quicker but underestimates?) [False]
depdensity=T/F  : Whether to use the BUSCO depth density profile in place of modal depth [True]
mapadjust=T/F   : Whether to adjust predicted genome size based on read length:mapping ratio [True]
### ~ Forking options ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ###
forks=X         : Number of parallel sequences to process at once [0]
killforks=X     : Number of seconds of no activity before killing all remaining forks. [36000]
killmain=T/F    : Whether to kill main thread rather than individual forks when killforks reached. [False]
logfork=T/F     : Whether to log forking in main log [False]
### ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ###
```

# DepthSizer workflow and options

The main inputs for DepthSizer genome size prediction are:

* `seqin=FILE` : Input sequence assembly to tidy [Required].
* `reads=FILELIST`: List of fasta/fastq files containing long reads. Wildcard allowed. Can be gzipped. For a single run (not cycling), a BAM file can be supplied instead with `bam=FILE`. (This will be preferentially used if found, and defaults to `$BASEFILE.bam`.) Read types (pb/ont/hifi) for each file are set with `readtype=LIST`, which will be cycled if shorter (default=`ont`). Optionally, the pre-calculated total read length can be provided with `readbp=INT` and/or the pre-calculated (haploid) genome size can be provided with `genomesize=INT`.
* `readtype=LIST` : List of ont/pb/hifi file types matching reads for minimap2 mapping [ont]
* `busco=TSVFILE` : BUSCO full table [`full_table_$BASEFILE.busco.tsv`] used for calculating single copy ("diploid") read depth.

## Step 1: BAM file (read mapping)

The first step is to generate a BAM file by mapping `reads` on to `seqin` using [minimap2](https://github.com/lh3/minimap2).
A pre-generated BAM file can be given instead using `bam=FILE`. There should be no secondary mapping of reads, as
these will inflate read depths, so filter these out if they were allowed during mapping. Similarly, the BAM file
should not contain unmapped reads.

## Step 2: BUSCO(MP) results

DepthSizer works on the principle that `Complete` BUSCO genes should represent predominantly single copy (diploid read
depth) regions along with some poor-quality and/or repeat regions. Assembly artefacts and collapsed repeats etc.
are predicted to deviate from diploid read depth in an inconsistent manner. Therefore, even if less than half the
region is actually diploid coverage, the **modal** read depth is expected to represent the actual single copy
read depth.

BUSCO single-copy genes are parsed from a BUSCO full results table, given by `busco=TSVFILE` (default
`full_table_$BASEFILE.busco.tsv`). This can be replaced with any table with the fields:
['BuscoID','Status','Contig','Start','End','Score','Length']. Entries are reduced to those with `Status` = `Complete`
and the `Contig`, `Start` and `End` fields are used to define the regions that should be predominantly single copy.
[BUSCOMP](https://github.com/slimsuite/buscomp) v0.10.0 and above will generate a `*.complete.tsv` file that can
be used in place of BUSCO results. This can enable rapid re-annotation of BUSCO genes following, for example,
vector trimming with [Diploidocus](https://github.com/slimsuite/diploidocus).

## Step 3: Total read volume

Genome size is estimated based on a crude calculation using the total combined sequencing length. This will be
calculated from `reads=FILELIST` unless provided with `readbp=INT`.

The `mapadjust` option attempts to correct for read mapping and imbalanced insertion:deletion ratios
etc. but has not been extensively tested. This uses `samtools coverage` to estimate the total number of bases
mapped onto the assembly (assembly bases with coverage x average depth) and `samtools fasta` to extract all the
mapped reads. The ratio
of the mapped read bases to the summed length of mapped reads is then calculated and used to adjust the total
combined read length. This is an attempt to adjust for losses in mapped reads at sequence ends and/or gaps (for
fragmented assemblies) and any sequencing error bias towards insertions or deletions. This adjustment can be
switched off with `mapadjust=F`.

**NOTE:** when running through Diploidocus, `mapadjust` is set to `False` by default for consistency with older runs.

## Step 4: Single-copy read depth

DepthSizer uses `samtools mpileup` (or `samtools depth` if `quickdepth=T`) to calculate the per-base read depth
and extracts the modal read depth for each BUSCO gene along with the overall modal read depth for all BUSCO gene
regions. Unless `depdensity=F`, the R function density() is used to find the peak of the overall BUSCO read depth
and this is used in place of the modal read depth. DepthSizer will report predicted genome sizes using all three
methods (see below). Preliminary analyses indicate that the density-derived peak depth is most accurate, but this
may change with further testing. Each depth estimate will be output as `#MODE` entries in the log.

BUSCO genes are used to self-validate the single-copy read depth estimate and the estimated copy number of each
gene is output to `*.buscoX.tdt`, where `X` is the depth method used (`mpileup` or `depth`) with mean values
output as `#CNV` log entries.

## Step 5: Genome size prediction

The final genome size is predicted based on the total (adjusted) combined sequencing length and the single-copy
read depth, as: `readbp`/`scdepth`.

Size predictions will be output for all single-copy read depth estimates calculated. These are found as `#GSIZE`
entries in the log file.

**NOTE:** There is currently no adjustment for non-nuclear DNA or contamination. The current unadjusted genome size
prediction appears to be an over-estimate. The `mapadjust` setting is still under development and may be prone to
issues for highly fragmented/gappy genome assemblies. Extreme mapadjust ratios should be treated with caution and
may indicate problems with the assembly and/or source data.


<br>
<small>&copy; 2021 Richard Edwards | richard.edwards@unsw.edu.au</small>
